Docs: update Getting Started page (#5112)
mermaid-js/mermaid: packages/mermaid/src/docs/intro/getting-started.md

---
outline: 'deep' # shows all h3 headings in outline in Vitepress
---

# Mermaid User Guide

## Mermaid is composed of three parts

1. Deployment
1. Syntax
1. Configuration

This section talks about the different ways to **deploy** Mermaid.

If you are a beginner:

- Check out the [Diagram Syntax](syntax-reference.md) page
- Check out the [Tutorials](../config/Tutorials.md) page

## Ways to use Mermaid

> 1. [Using the Mermaid Chart Editor](getting-started.html#_1-using-the-mermaid-chart-editor)
> 1. [Using the Mermaid Live Editor](getting-started.html#_1-using-the-mermaid-chart-editor)
> 1. [Using Mermaid Plugins and Integrations](getting-started.html#_3-using-mermaid-plugins)
> 1. [Calling the Mermaid JavaScript API](getting-started.html#_4-calling-the-mermaid-javascript-api)
> 1. [Adding Mermaid as a dependency](getting-started.html#_5-adding-mermaid-as-a-dependency)

Reviewer: We should prefer linking to `.md` instead of `.html`, so that the docs still work in markdown, but because these links are in the same file, we don't need them at all!

Also, the live editor link is pointing to the wrong place.

I've also updated the numbering, since although Markdown will automatically output the correct numbers, there are some users that will read the raw text, so we should the correct numbers there too.

```suggestion
1. [Using the Mermaid Chart Editor](#_1-using-the-mermaid-chart-editor)
2. [Using the Mermaid Live Editor](#_2-using-the-mermaid-live-editor)
3. [Using Mermaid Plugins and Integrations](#_3-using-mermaid-plugins)
4. [Calling the Mermaid JavaScript API](#_4-calling-the-mermaid-javascript-api)
5. [Adding Mermaid as a dependency](#_5-adding-mermaid-as-a-dependency)
```

To learn more, visit the [Usage](../config/usage.md) page.

## 1. Using the Mermaid Chart Editor

Available at the [Mermaid Chart](https://www.mermaidchart.com/) website.

Mermaid Chart is a web-based diagram editor that allows you to create and edit diagrams in your browser. It is built by the team behind Mermaid.

Features include:

- AI diagramming
- Collaboration & multi-user editing
- Storage
- and more

To learn more, visit the [Mermaid Chart page](/ecosystem/mermaid-chart.html) in the Ecosystem section of the documentation.

Or go to the [Mermaid Chart website](https://www.mermaidchart.com/app/sign-up) to sign up for a Free account.

## 2. Using the Mermaid Live Editor

Available at the [Mermaid Live Editor](https://mermaid.live) website.

### Features

> <br />

Reviewer: I'm not a super big fan of these `<br />` (or adding any HTML to markdown files). It does make the generated website look nicer, though, so I see a reason for leaving them in.

Maybe I'm biased since I normally spend most of my time reading these docs in plain text :laughing:

Or:

- create a new diagram from scratch
- use a Sample Diagram from the `Sample Diagrams` section

<br />

#### • Loading from Gists

The Gist you create should have a `code.mmd` file and optionally a `config.json`, similar to this [example](https://gist.github.com/sidharthv96/6268a23e673a533dcb198f241fd7012a).

```note
To learn about Gists, visit the GitHub documentation page on [Creating gists](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/editing-and-sharing-content-with-gists/creating-gists).
```

Once you have created a Gist, copy paste the Gist URL into the respective field in the `Actions` section and click on the `Load Gist` button.

Here is an example of a Gist being loaded into the Editor:

<https://mermaid.live/edit?gist=https://gist.github.com/sidharthv96/6268a23e673a533dcb198f241fd7012a>

And, here is the diagram view from the above example:

<https://mermaid.live/view?gist=https://gist.github.com/sidharthv96/6268a23e673a533dcb198f241fd7012a>

## 3. Using Mermaid Plugins

### Mermaid Plugins

You can generate Mermaid diagrams from within popular applications using plug-ins.

> 

Reviewer: Should we mention the most common use-case of mermaid here, which is probably GitHub's/GitLab's integration?

`````suggestion

For many apps that support markdown (e.g. [GitHub][] and [GitLab][]), you can add mermaid diagrams to markdown by making a `mermaid` code block, like so:

````markdown
The following code-block will be rendered as a mermaid diagram:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
  Hello --> World
```
````

[GitHub]: https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/working-with-advanced-formatting/creating-diagrams
[GitLab]: https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/markdown.html#mermaid

`````

Reviewer 2: 💯 we should add these.
